Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Dec 15;412(2):202-13.

Physical properties and subunits of Haemopis grandis erythrocruorin.

Andonian MR, Barrett AS, Vinogradov SN.

The erythrocruorin of the leech Haemopis grandis possessed an S20,w of 57 S at
neutral pH, its isoelectric point at pH 6.0 and exhibited a slightly sigmoid
oxygenation curve with n approximately 2.1 and P50 = 11.2 mm at pH 7.4. A minimum
molecular weight of 24000 +/- 1500 per heme group was determined from the iron
and heme contents, 0.22 +/- 0.01 and 2.73 +/- 0.14 weight %, respectively. The
subunit composition of the erythrocruorin was investigated using gel filtration
in sodium dodecyl sulfate and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in sodium
dodecyl sulfate at neutral pH. Haemopis erythrocruorin dissociated in the
presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate into four subunits (1 through 4) possessing
molecular weights of about 27000, 23000, 21000 and 13500, respectively. When the 
erythrocruorin was reduced with mercaptoethanol prior to sodium dodecyl sulfate
electrophoresis, three subunits were observed, possessing molecular weights of
about 13000 (I), 16500 (II) and 28000 (III). Sodium dodecyl sulfate
electrophoresis of the isolated subunits 1 through 4 showed that subunit I was
provided by subunits 1 and 4, subunit II was provided by subunit 1 and subunit
III was provided by both subunit 2 and subunit 3. Haemopis erythrocruorin thus
appeared to consist of at least five different polypeptide chains. It is likely
that not all of the constituent polypeptide chains were associated each with a
heme group. The shape of the Haemopis erythrocruorin observed by electron
microscopy appeared to be consistent with the two-tiered hexagonal array
characteristic of annelid erythrocruorins and chlorocruorins.


PMID: 84  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

