Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 20;410(1):193-209.

Radioactive labeling and location of specific thiol groups in myosin from fast,
slow and cardiac muscles.

Pfister M, Schaub MC, Watterson JG, Knecht M, Waser PG.

1. Based on incorporation of radioactively labeled N-ethylmaleimide, the readily 
reactive thiol groups of isolated myosin (EC 3.6.1.3) from fast, slow and cardiac
muscles could be classified into 3 types. All 3 myosins contain 2 thiol-1, 2
thiol-2 and a variable number of thiol-3 groups per molecule. Both thiol-1 and
thiol-2 groups which are essential for functioning of the K+-stimulated ATPase,
are located in the heavy chains in all 3 myosin types. 2. The variation in the
incorporation pattern of N-ethylmaleimide over the 3 thiol group classes under
steady-state conditions of Mg(2+) - ATP hydrolysis allowed different
conformations of some reaction intermediates to be characterized. In all 3 types 
of myosin the hydrolytic cycle of Mg(2+) - ATP was found to be controlled by the 
same step at 25 degrees C. In all three cases, this rate-limiting step is changed
in the same way by lowereing temperature. 3. Using the chemically determined
molecular weights for myosin light chains, their stoichiometry was found on the
basis of sodium dodecyl sulfate electrophoresis to be 1.2 : 2.1 : 0.8 for light
chain-1: light chain-2:light chain-3 per molecule of fast myosin, 2.0 : 1.9 for
light chain-1:light chain-2 per molecule of slow myosin and 1.9 : 1.9 for light
chain-1:light chain-2 per molecule of cardiac myosin. This qualitative difference
in light subunit composition between the fast and the two types of slow myosin is
not reflected in the small variations of the characteristics exhibited by the
isolated myosins, but rather seems to be connected with their respective
myofibrillar ATPase activities.


PMID: 73  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

