Arzneimittelforschung. 1975 Sep;25(9):1460-3.

[Studies on the action of an anticholinergic agent in combination with a
tranquilizer on gastric juice secretion in man].

[Article in German]

Scherberger RR, Kaess H, Br√ºckner S.

A double-blind study with intra-individual comparisons was carried out to
investigate the effects of 15 mg of
(8r)-3alpha-hydroxy-8-isopropyl-1alphaH-tropanium bromide(+/-)-tropate (Sch
1000), 15 mg Sch 1000 + 10 mg oxazepam, 10 mg oxazepam and placebo with oral
administration in randomized sequence on gastric juice volume, amount of acid,
concentration and pH values in 12 healthy volunteers. The secretion parameters
were measured during a 1-h basal period and a 2-h stimulation period. The gastric
juice was obtained in 15 min portions via stomach tube. Stimulation was effected 
by 1 mug/kg/h pentagastrin via drip infusion. The Friedman test was used for the 
comparative statistical evaluation, and individual comparisons were carried out
by means of the Wilcoxon test (pair-differences rank). The results show that Sch 
1000 and Sch 1000 + oxazepam were equal in effect on basal and stimulated
secretion volume. As compared with placebo, it was not possible to establish an
effect on secretion volume for oxazepam alone. Sch 1000 and Sch 1000 + oxazepam
were found to be equipotent in reducing the amount of basal acid, while oxazepam 
reduced this quantity only during the first 30 min of basal secretion. None of
the three active preparations was capable of inhibiting the stimulated acid,
although both Sch 1000 preparations produced a clear trend towards lowered mean
values. During the basal secretion period, all three test preparations had an
inhibiting action on acid concentration, but none of them had a significant
effect during the stimulation period. The pH value was savely increased only by
Sch 1000 and Sch 1000 + oxazepam, and this even only during the basal period. The
results are discussed.


PMID: 26  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

