Biochemistry. 1975 Nov 18;14(23):5094-8.

Formation of transient complexes in the glutamate dehydrogenase catalyzed
reaction.

Sanner T.

The reaction of glutamate dehydrogenase and glutamate (gl) with NAD+ and NADP+
has been studied with stopped-flow techniques. The enzyme was in all experiments 
present in excess of the coenzyme. The results indicate that the ternary complex 
(E-NAD(P)H-kg) is present as an intermediate in the formation of the stable
complex (E-NAD(P)H-gl). The identification of the complexes is based on their
absorption spectra. The binding of the coenzyme to (E-gl) is the rate-limiting
step in the formation of (E-NAD(P)H-kg) while the dissociation of
alpha-ketoglutarate (kg) from this complex is the rate-limiting step in the
formation of (E-NAD(P)H-gl). The Km for glutamate was 20-25 mM in the first
reaction and 3 mM in the formation of the stable complex. The Km values were
independent of the coenzyme. The reaction rates with NAD+ were approximately 50% 
greater than those with NADP+. Furthermore, high glutamate concentration
inhibited the formation of (E-NADH-kg) while no substrate inhibition was found
with NADP+ as coenzyme. ADP enhanced while GTP reduced the rate of (E-NAD(P)H-gl)
formation. The rate of formation of (E-NAD(P)H-kg) was inhibited by ADP, while it
increased at high glutamate concentration when small amounts of GTP were added.
The results show that the higher activity found with NAD+ compared to NADP+ under
steady-state assay conditions do not necessarily involve binding of NAD+ to the
ADP activating site of the enzyme. Moreover, the substrate inhibition found at
high glutamate concentration under steady-state assay condition is not due to the
formation of (E-NAD(P)H-gl) as this complex is formed with Km of 3 mM glutamate, 
and the substrate inhibition is only significant at 20-30 times this
concentration.


PMID: 39  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

