Arzneimittelforschung. 1975 Sep;25(9):1436-42.

Pharmacological properties of new neuroleptic compounds.

Coscia L, Causa P, Giuliani E, Nunziata A.

RMI 61 140, RMI 61 144 and RMI 61 280 are newly synthetized
N-[8-R-dibenzo(b,f)oxepin-10-yl]-N'-methyl-piperazine-maleates which show
interesting psychopharmacologic effects. This work contains the results of a
study performed with these three compounds, in order to demonstrate their
neuropsycholeptic activity in comparison with chloropromazine (CPZ) and
chlordiazepoxide (CPD). The inhibition of motility observed in mice shows that
the compounds reduce the normal spontaneous motility as well as the muscle tone. 
The central-depressant activity is evidenced by increased barbiturate-induced
sleep and a remarkable eyelid ptosis can also be observed. Our compounds do not
show any activity on electroshock just as do CPZ and CPD. As to the antipsychotic
outline, our compounds show strong reduction of lethality due to amphetamine in
grouped mice and a strong antiapomorphine activity. They show also an
antiaggressive effect and an inhibitory activity on avoidance behaviour much
stronger than CPZ. We have also found extrapyramidal effects, as catalepsy,
common to many tranquillizers of the kind of the standards used by us. As for
vegetative phenomena, the compounds show hypotensive dose related action ranging 
from moderate to strong, probably due to an a-receptor inhibition. Adrenolytic
activity against lethal doses of adrenaline, antiserotonin and antihistaminic
effects, as well as other actions (hypothermia, analgesia, etc.) confirm that RMI
61 140, RMI 61 144 and RMI 61 280 are endowed with pharmacologic properties
similar and more potent than those of CPZ. Studies on the metabolism of brain
catecholamines show that they are similar to CPZ, although with less effect on
dopamine level.


PMID: 25  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

