Biochemistry. 1975 Dec 2;14(24):5308-11.

Circular dichroism and fluorescence studies of homogeneous antibodies to type III
pneumococcal polysaccharide.

Jaton JC, Huser H, Blatt Y, Pecht I.

The near-ultraviolet circular dichroism (CD) of three homogeneous anti-type III
pneumococcal antibodies in the absence and the presence of the specific
hexasaccharide ligand was studied. In addition recombinations and hybridizations 
of H and L chains derived from two of these antibodies were carried out and the
CD spectra of bound and free reconstituted IgG molecules were measured. The
results indicate that the CD spectra of the native antibodies in the 260-310-nm
range are very similar in shape and sign and exhibit a positive band at 285 nm.
The homologous reconstituted antibody molecules exhibited CD spectra very similar
in shape and sign to those of the native antibody molecules although recombinant 
molecules are no longer stabilized by interchain disulfide bonds. Upon addition
of the hexasaccharide ligand, a significant decrease in amplitude of the CD
spectra (18-21%) occurred in all three native antibodies and their Fab fragments 
as well as in the homologous recombinant molecules. No CD spectral changes could 
be detected upon interaction of the hapten ligand with the heterologous
recombinants. All homogeneous antibodies studied exhibited fluorescence quenching
upon oligosaccharide binding and a blue shift of the emission maximum. This
property allowed the determination of the binding constant of one selected
antibody to be made. Taken together, CD and fluorescence spectroscopic data
suggest that oligosaccharide ligands induced detectable conformational changes in
the Fab fragment of the antibody.


PMID: 50  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

