Biochemistry. 1975 Dec 16;14(25):5428-37.

Subunit interactions in yeast glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.

Mockrin SC, Byers LD, Koshland DE Jr.

The spontaneous inactivation of yeast glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
was found to fit a simple two-state model at pH 8.5 and 25 degrees. The first
step is a relatively rapid dissociation of the tetramer to dimers with the
equilibrium largely in favor of the tetramer. In the absence of NAD+ the dimer
inactivates irreversibly. The apoenzyme is quite stable with a half-life for
complete activity loss proportional to the square root of the enzyme
concentration. Perturbances of the protein structure (by pH, ionic strength, and 
specific salts), which have no effect on the tetrameric state of the molecule,
result in an alteration of the cooperativity of NAD+ binding, the reactivity of
the active-site sulfhydryl group, and the catalytic activity of the enzyme.
Covalent modification of two of the four active-site sulfhydryl groups has
profound effects on the enzymic activity which are mediated by changes in the
subunit interactions. Sedimentation analysis and hybridization studies indicate
that the interaction between subunits remains strong after covalent modification.
Under normal physiological and equilibrium dialysis conditions the protein is a
tetramer. Equilibrium dialysis studies of NAD+ binding to the enzyme at pH 8.5
and 25 degrees reveal a mixed cooperativity pattern. A model consistent with
these observations and the observed half-of-the-sites reactivity is that of
ligand induced sequential conformational changes which are transferred across
strongly interacting subunit domains. Methods for distinguishing negatively
cooperative binding patterns from mixtures of denatured enzyme and multiple
species are discussed.


PMID: 55  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

