Biochemistry. 1975 Dec 2;14(24):5274-9.

The influence of pH on the interaction of inhibitors with triosephosphate
isomerase and determination of the pKa of the active-site carboxyl group.

Hartman FC, LaMuraglia GM, Tomozawa Y, Wolfenden R.

Ionization effects on the binding of the potential transition state analogues
2-phosphoglycolate and 2-phosphoglycolohydroxamate appear to be attributable to
the changing state of ionization of the ligands themselves, therefore it is
unnecessary to postulate the additional involvement of an ionizing residue at the
active site of triosephosphate isomerase to explain the influence of changing pH 
on Ki in the neutral range. The binding of the competitive inhibitor inorganic
sulfate is insensitive to changing pH in the neutral range. 3-Chloroacetol
sulfate, synthesized as an active-site-specific reagent for triosephosphate
isomerase, is used to provide an indication of the pKa of the essential carboxyl 
group of this enzyme. Previously described active-site-specific reagents for the 
isomerase were phosphate esters, and their changing state of ionization
(accompanied by possible changes in their affinity for the active site) may have 
complicated earlier attempts to determine the pKa of the essential carboxyl group
from the pH dependence of the rate of inactivation. Being a strong monoprotic
acid, chloroacetol sulfate is better suited to the determination of the pKa of
the carboxyl group. Chloroacetol sulfate inactivates triosephosphate isomerase by
the selective esterification of the same carboxyl group as that which is
esterified by the phosphate esters described earlier. From the pH dependence of
the rate of inactivation of yeast triosephosphate isomerase, the apparent pKa of 
the active-site carboxyl group is estimated as 3.9 +/- 0.1.


PMID: 47  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

