Biochemistry. 1975 Dec 2;14(24):5267-73.

Purification and properties of Escherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase.

Baccanari D, Phillips A, Smith S, Sinski D, Burchall J.

Dihydrofolate reductase has been purified 40-fold to apparent homogeneity from a 
trimethoprim-resistant strain of Escherichia coli (RT 500) using a procedure that
includes methotrexate affinity column chromatography. Determinations of the
molecular weight of the enzyme based on its amino acid composition, sedimentation
velocity, and sodium dodecyl sulfate gel electrophoresis gave values of 17680,
17470 and 18300, respectively. An aggregated form of the enzyme with a low
specific activity can be separated from the monomer by gel filtration; treatment 
of the aggregate with mercaptoethanol or dithiothreitol results in an increase in
enzymic activity and a regeneration of the monomer. Also, multiple molecular
forms of the monomer have been detected by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
The unresolved enzyme exhibits two pH optima (pH 4.5 and pH 7.0) with
dihydrofolate as a substrate. Highest activities are observed in buffers
containing large organic cations. In 100 mM imidazolium chloride (pH 7), the
specific activity is 47 mumol of dihydrofolate reduced per min per mg at 30
degrees. Folic acid also serves as a substrate with a single pH optimum of pH
4.5. At this pH the Km for folate is 16 muM, and the Vmax is 1/1000 of the rate
observed with dihydrofolate as the substrate. Monovalent cations (Na+, K+, Rb+,
and Cs+) inhibit dihydrofolate reductase; at a given ionic strength the degree of
inhibition is a function of the ionic radius of the cation. Divalent cations are 
more potent inhibitors; the I50 of BaCl2 is 250 muM, as compared to 125 mM for
KCl. Anions neither inhibit nor activate the enzyme.


PMID: 46  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

