Biochemistry. 1975 Nov 18;14(23):5168-75.

A competitive labeling method for the determination of the chemical properties of
solitary functional groups in proteins.

Duggleby RG, Kaplan H.

The properties of the functional groups in a protein can be used as
built-in-probes of the structure of the protein. We have developed a general
procedure whereby the ionization constant and chemical reactivity of solitary
functional groups in proteins may be determined. The method may be applied to the
side chain of histidine, tyrosine, lysine, and cysteine, as well as to the amino 
terminus of the protein. The method, which is an extension of the competitive
labeling technique using [3H]- and [14C]1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (N2ph-F) in a
double-labeling procedure, is rapid and sensitive. Advantage is taken of the fact
that after acid hydrolysis of a dinitrophenylated protein, a derivative is
obtained which must be derived from a unique position in the protein. The method 
has been applied to the solitary histidine residue of lysozyme, alpha-lytic
protease, and Streptomyces griseus (S.G.) trypsin, as well as to the amino
terminus of the latter protein. The following parameters were obtained for
reaction with N2ph-F at 20 degrees C in 0.1 N KCl: the histidine of hen egg-white
lysozyme, pKa of 6.4 and second-order velocity constant of 0.188 M-1 min-1; the
histidine of alpha-lytic protease, pKa of 6.5 and second-order velocity constant 
of 0.0235 M-1 min-1; the histidine of S.G. trypsin, pKa of 6.5 and second-order
velocity constant of 0.0328 M-1 min-1; the valyl amino terminus of S.G. trypsin, 
pKa of 8.1 and second-order velocity constant of 0.403 M-1 min-1. In addition,
the results obtained provide clues as to the microenvironments of these
functional groups, and indicate that the proteins studied undergo pH-dependent
conformational changes which affect the microenvironment, and hence the chemical 
reactivity of these groups.


PMID: 42  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

