Biochemistry. 1975 Dec 2;14(24):5312-5.

Conformational changes induced in a homogeneous anti-type III pneumococcal
antibody by oligosaccharides of increasing size.

Jaton JC, Huser H, Braun DG, Givol D, Pecht I, Schlessinger J.

The circular polarization of luminescence (CPL) emitted by tryptophan residues
was used as a sensitive probe for measuring ligand-induced structural changes in 
a homogeneous type III pneumococcal antibody. A series of oligosaccharide ligands
of increasing size derived from type III polysaccharide by partial acid
hydrolysis was assayed. Ligand-induced changes in the circular polarization of
fluorescence of the antibody were observed for all antigens tested, including
tetra-, hexa-, and octasaccharides and a 16-residue oligomer, the largest changes
being recorded upon interaction with the intact soluble type III pneumococcal
(SIII) polysaccharide. When Fab' or F(ab')2 fragments were used instead of the
antibody IgG for binding of SIII polysaccharide, the extent of conformational
changes was decreased. This suggests interactions between Fab and Fc portions in 
the IgG molecule and subsequent conformational changes in Fc part upon antigen
binding. Reduction of interchain disulfide bonds abolished the additional
spectral changes attributed to the Fc part but not the changes observed in the
Fab part, thus suggesting that the presence of the interchain disulfide bond in
the hinge region is required for maximal CPL changes to occur. Small monovalent
ligands, i.e., the tetra-, hexa-, and octasaccharides, were capable of inducing
CPL changes in the Fab part of the antibody molecule as well as CPL changes
attributed to the Fc portion. A multivalent ligand containing about 16 sugar
residues appears to be the minimal antigenic size required for triggering
conformational changes attributed to the Fc part, similar to those seen in the
interaction with the whole polysaccharide antigen.


PMID: 51  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

