Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 11;408(2):101-11.

Regulation of nitrogen fixation. Nitrogenase-derepressed mutants of Klebsiella
pneumoniae.

Shanmugam KT, Chan I, Morandi C.

1. A new procedure is described for selecting nitrogenase-derepressed mutants
based on the method of Brenchley et al. (Brenchley, J.E., Prival, M.J. and
Magasanik, B. (1973) J. Biol. Chem. 248, 6122-6128) for isolating
histidase-constitutive mutants of a non-N2-fixing bacterium. 2. Nitrogenase
levels of the new mutants in the presence of NH4+ were as high as 100% of the
nitrogenase activity detected in the absence of NH4+. 3. Biochemical
characterization of these nitrogen fixation (nif) derepressed mutants reveals
that they fall into three classes. Three mutants (strains SK-24, 28 and 29),
requiring glutamate for growth, synthesize nitrogenase and glutamine synthetase
constitutively (in the presence of NH4+). A second class of mutants (strains
SK-27 and 37) requiring glutamine for growth produces derepressed levels of
nitrogenase activity and synthesized catalytically inactive glutamine synthetase 
protein, as determined immunologically. A third class of glutamine-requiring,
nitrogenase-derepressed mutants (strain SK-25 and 26) synthesizes neither a
catalytically active glutamine synthetase enzyme nor an immunologically
cross-reactive glutamine synthetase protein. 4. F-prime complementation analysis 
reveals that the mutant strains SK-25, 26, 27, 37 map in a segment of the
Klebsiella chromosome corresponding to the region coding for glutamine
synthetase. Since the mutant strains SK-27 and SK-37 produce inactive glutamine
synthetase protein, it is concluded that these mutations map within the glutamine
synthetase structural gene.


PMID: 59  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

