Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Dec 16;413(3):394-414.

Conformational and molecular responses to pH variation of the purified membrane
adenosine triphosphatase of Micrococcus lysodeikticus.

Nieto M, Mu√±oz E, Carreira J, Andreu JM.

A preparation of ATPase from the membranes of Micrococcus lysodeikticus,
solubilized and more than 95% pure, showed two main bands in analytical
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. They did not correspond to isoenzymes because
one band could be converted into the other by exposure to a mildly alkaline pH
value. The conversion was paralleled by changes in molecular weight, circular
dichroism and catalytic properties. Denaturation by pH at 25 degrees C was
followed by means of circular dichroism, ultracentrifugation and polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis. A large conformational transition took place in the acid
range with midpoints at about pH = 3.6 (I = 10(-4) M), 4.3 (I = 0.03 M) and 5.3
(I = 0.1 M). The transition was irreversible. Strong aggregation of the protein
occurred in this range of pH. The final product was largely random coil, but even
at pH 1.5 dissociation into individual subunits was not complete. However,
partial dissociation took place at pH 5 (I = 0.028 M). At this pH value the
enzyme was inactive, but 20-30% of the activity could be recovered when the pH
was returned to 7.5. In the alkaline region the midpoint of the transition
occurred near pH = 11 (I = 0.028 M). The pK of most of the tyrosine residues of
the protein was about 10.9. The unfolding was irreversible and the protein was
soon converted into peptide species with molecular weights lower than those
determined for the subunits by gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium
dodecyl sulphate. Conventional proteolysis did not account for the
transformation.


PMID: 91  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

