Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 20;410(1):45-60.

Characteristics of the dephosphorylated form of phosphorylase purified from rat
liver and measurement of its activity in crude liver preparations.

Tan AW, Nuttall FQ.

The phosphorylated form of liver glycogen phosphorylase (alpha-1,4-glucan :
orthophosphate alpha-glucosyl-transferase, EC 2.4.1.1) (phosphorylase a) is
active and easily measured while the dephosphorylated form (phosphorylase b), in 
contrast to the muscle enzyme, has been reported to be essentially inactive even 
in the presence of AMP. We have purified both forms of phosphorylase from rat
liver and studied the characteristics of each. Phosphorylase b activity can be
measured with our assay conditions. The phosphorylase b we obtained was
stimulated by high concentrations of sulfate, and was a substrate for muscle
phosphorylase kinase whereas phosphorylase a was inhibited by sulfate, and was a 
substrate for liver phosphorylase phosphatase. Substrate binding to phosphorylase
b was poor (KM glycogen = 2.5 mM, glucose-1-P = 250 mM) compared to phosphorylase
a (KM glycogen = 1.8 mM, KM glucose-1-P = 0.7 mM). Liver phosphorylase b was
active in the absence of AMP. However, AMP lowered the KM for glucose-1-P to 80
mM for purified phosphorylase b and to 60 mM for the enzyme in crude extract (Ka 
= 0.5 mM). Using appropriate substrate, buffer and AMP concentrations, assay
conditions have been developed which allow determination of phosphorylase a and
90% of the phosphorylase b activity in liver extracts. Interconversion of the two
forms can be demonstrated in vivo (under acute stimulation) and in vitro with
little change in total activity. A decrease in total phosphorylase activity has
been observed after prolonged starvation and in diabetes.


PMID: 75  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

