Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 17;413(1):143-56.

Alterations in phospholipid-dependent (Na+ +K+)-ATPase activity due to lipid
fluidity. Effects of cholesterol and Mg2+.

Kimelberg HK.

The (Na+ +K+)-activated, Mg2+-dependent ATPase from rabbit kidney outer medulla
was prepared in a partially inactivated, soluble form depleted of endogenous
phospholipids, using deoxycholate. This preparation was reactivated 10 to 50-fold
by sonicated liposomes of phosphatidylserine, but not by non-sonicated
phosphatidylserine liposomes or sonicated phosphatidylcholine liposomes. The
reconstituted enzyme resembled native membrane preparations of (Na+ +K+)-ATPase
in its pH optimum being around 7.0, showing optimal activity at Mg2+:ATP mol
ratios of approximately 1 and a Km value for ATP of 0.4 mM. Arrhenius plots of
this reactivated activity at a constant pH of 7.0 and an Mg2+: ATP mol ratio of
1:1 showed a discontinuity (sharp change of slope) at 17 degrees C, with
activation energy (Ea) values of 13-15 kcal/mol above this temperature and 30-35 
kcal below it. A further discontinuity was also found at 8.0 degrees C and the Ea
below this was very high (greater than 100 kcal/mol). Increased Mg2+
concentrations at Mg2+:ATP ratios in excess of 1:1 inhibited the (Na+ +K+)-ATPase
activity and also abolished the discontinuities in the Arrhenius plots. The
addition of cholesterol to phosphatidylserine at a 1:1 mol ratio partially
inhibited (Na+ +K+)-ATPase reactivation. Arrhenius plots under these conditions
showed a single discontinuity at 20 degrees C and Ea values of 22 and 68 kcal/mol
above and below this temperature respectively. The ouabain-insensitive
Mg2+-ATPase normally showed a linear Arrhenius plot with an Ea of 8 kcal/mol. The
cholesterol-phosphatidylserine mixed liposomes stimulated the Mg2+-ATPase
activity, which now also showed a discontinuity at 20 degrees C with, however, an
increased value of 14 kcal/mol above this temperature and 6 kcal/mol below.
Kinetic studies showed that cholesterol had no significant effect on the Km
values for ATP. Since both cholesterol and Mg2+ are known to alter the effects of
temperature on the fluidity of phospholipids, the above results are discussed in 
this context.


PMID: 90  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

