Biochim Biophys Acta. 1975 Nov 18;412(1):168-80.

The binding of organic phosphates to human methaemoglobin A. Perturbation of the 
polymerization of proteins by effectors.

Baghurst PA, Nichol LW.

Theory is presented relating to the binding of an effector to two states of a
protein acceptor coexisting in equilibrium. The problem is treated in terms of
the four possible cases which specify relations between numbers of binding sites 
and intrinsic binding constants relevant to the acceptor states. It is shown that
a distinction between these cases may be possible on the basis of the form of a
plot of unbound effector concentration versus the constituent equilibrium
coefficient which may be calculated from the sedimentation coefficient of the
protein constituent. Particularly noteworthy in this respect is the finding that 
a turning point may exist in this plot for defined conditions with systems in
which binding sites are not conserved (and binding affinities are altered) on
polymer formation. The latter type of system is exemplified by studies on
methaemoglobin A in 0.25 M sodium acetate, pH 5.4. In the absence of added
organic phosphate effectors, a dimer-tetramer equilibrium operates governed by an
association constant of 4.15 +/- 0.06 X 10(3) 1/mol, determined from
sedimentation equilibrium results. Correlation of sedimentation velocity and
equilibrium results shows that addition of adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP)
results in its binding to one site on each of the dimeric (alpha beta) and
tetrameric (alpha beta)2 species with intrinsic binding constants
1.03-10(3)-1.20-10(3) and 1.1-10(4)-2.1-10(4) 1/mol, respectively. It is also
shown that 2,3-diphosphoglycerate perturbs the dimer-tetramer equilibrium in a
similar way to ATP.


PMID: 80  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

